Avida 2.12 Release Notes

The following items are major features and changes present in this release of
Avida.  See the repository commit logs at http://avida.devosoft.org for details
of other changes.


New Features:

- Multiple Simulataneous Instruction Sets/Hardware Types

    Avida now supports experiments in which organisms running different
    instruction sets and/or hardware types may coexist in the population
    simultaneously.  


Enhancements:

- Completely New Classification Framework

   The classification system has been redesigned to be much more flexible and
   extensible.  Conceptually, the classification system takes living entities
   (bio-units) and places them into groups (bio-groups) as appropriate.
   Bio-units/groups include enhanced source tracking and full support for
   extended genome information (necessary for multiple instruction set support
   and future enhancements).

- New, High-Performance Genotype Tracking

   Rewritten for the new classification system, the genotype tracking system
   performance was also improved significantly.  The new data structures
   used by the genotype manager no longer degrade under heavy load (high-
   genotype count).

- Significantly Improved Large Population Support

   The new genotype tracking system allows Avida to scale to larger populations
   with nearly linear performance (i.e. a 20000 organism population will take
   a little more than twice as long as a 10000 organism population).


Changes:

- New Instruction Set Configuration Format

   A new, avida.cfg based instruction set configuration format has been
   introduced.  The new format allows for the specification of multiple, named
   instruction sets.  Additionally, options must now be specified by name and
   may be listed in any order following the instruction name.  See the
   documentation regarding instruction sets for further details.

- Organism File Hardware Type and Instruction Set Directives

   Organism files now support the use of #inst_set ${name} and #hw_type ${num}
   directives.  These directives inform avida what instruction set and
   hardware type a particular organism file should use when loaded (Inject, etc)
   If the directives are not included, the default (first) instruction set will
   be used.

- START_CREATURE/START_ORGANISM Now Deprecated

   Use Inject actions at the beginning of your experiment to specify exactly
   how you would like the experiment to be seeded.

- HARDWARE_TYPE Setting and INST_SET File Deprecated

   Use the new instruction set format instead.  Backward compatibility may be
   activated by setting the avida.cfg option INST_SET_LOAD_LEGACY to 1.  The
   name of the instruction set will be the filename/path specified in INST_SET.

- Old Style Species and "Lineage" (Clade) Tracking Removed

   These features relied on the old classification system that has been replaced
   Species and clade tracking will return in a future version, implemented
   under the new classification system.

Deprecated features will be removed in the next version of Avida.


Known Issues:

- The PARENT_MUT_RATE setting will cause the parent's genome to mutate when
  it gives birth, but currently it is not treated like a second offspring, so
  the genotype will not be changed, and in general it cannot act with many
  other settings (like mutation reversions)

- BIRTH_METHOD 7 is currently a local birth method, but not grouped with the
  rest of them.  This required a special condition in cBirthChamber.cc for
  local recombination and in cPopulation.cc for offspring facing parent.
